	There have been over been over 8000 players drafted to the NBA over its 75 year life span, but only 35 players have been been privileged enough to be voted NBA League MVP. That's just .4%. With the start of the new NBA season our group wanted to know what makes these .4%ers so elite? Were there external forces that helped develop them like a college program or NBA franchise? Does playing one position give you an advantage over the others like a QB in the NFL? Or is they so blessed with physical advantages that makes up for lack of skill? These are the questions that answer in this Analysis.
	60 lucky young men are selected in the NBA draft every year either out of college or straight from high shcool. Searching through the NBA's complete draft history we discover 2 things. The first thing we discovered are 10 school that produce more NBA ready talent than anyone other school. They are Kentucky, UCLA, UNC, Duke, Kansas, Indiana, Arizona, Michigan, Louisville, and Maryland. If you got to one of those schools odds are you can make it to the NBA. However, 27 different schools have produced NBA MVPs with all schools that produced an MVP having a standard deviation of .456. There is practically now correlation there. 
	When you get to the NBA however, there are franchise that give you a higher chance of being in NBA contention. LA Lakers, Boston Celtics, Philadelphia 76ers, and the Houston Rockets, have combined to produce one 33% of all MVPs. Being good on one of those teams is an advantage, but a big one. There is no external force that makes MVP players.
	The game of basketball is ever changing, so we broke down the number of the League MVPs by position in each decade, or eras as fans call them. Interesting things were discovered. Prior to 1980 centers dominated the league but after 1980 their relevance took a sharp decline. That's because in 1979 the MVP award was changed to be decided by a panel of sportswriters and broadcasters throughout the US and on top of this the  3-point liner was introduces the same year. Since then their hasn't been one position that dominated the rest.	
	The NBA hosts a combine ever year for the world’s top prospects. Over the last 20 years, stats like Height, Reach and Vertical Leap have been record for every player that attends the combine. 
Given the athletic nature of basketball,Do MVPs must have above average physical attributes?We compared the Height, Reach and Vertical Leap  of Lebron James, Derrick Rose,Kevin Durant, Steph Curry, Russell Westbrook and James Harden( every MVP that attended the combine) to the  league average.MVPs ability to jump high is an advantage, while their Height and Reach for the majority of the MVPS were below the league average. MVPs are physically gifted but not more than the average player.
	MVPs are expected to contribute more than any other players in their team, not to say in the entire league. Besides media vote, a player’s consistent performance matters.Three primary rubrics to enter the mvp contention list: Points per game, rebounds per game and assist per game. Every MVP ranked the highest in the league in each of these categories through the year.While size can help, basketball is a game of skill and finesse. 
	To conclude,The path to the NBA is less important than the Team they are playing but both are big factors. Since the 80’s the position they play is less important. Skill and consistency is more important than physical attributes.

For visuals view the graphs.docx



	


